Printing your own BBCs

== Professional duplication, in quantity ==

Most versions of the Linuxcare Bootable Business Card have used
<http://www.shapecd.com/ ShapeCD> for duplication services.

The LNX-BBC project uses <http://www.mediatec-inc.com/contact.html
Wing Shing Optical Disc Company, Ltd.>, of Hong Kong -- U.S. office
(800)400-2287. We've been very satisfied with their work and impressed
with their low prices and rapid turnaround.

== Business-card CD-R blanks ==

Most vendors of optical media now have business card (50 MB) CD-R
blanks available. You should expect to pay $0.40-$0.60 apiece, in
quantities of ten to a few hundred.

We usually buy our blanks at retail computer shows and bazaars.
They're also readily available on-line; Google searches such as
<http://www.google.com/search?q=business+card+cd-r business card cd-r>
or <http://www.google.com/search?q=50-MB+cd-r 50-MB cd-r> or
<http://www.google.com/search?q=business+card+cd+blank business card
cd blank> return thousands of hits. Some large computer stores such as
<http://www.frys.com/ Frys> are now carrying blank business card CD-R
media, but you may find lower prices on-line.

We've heard a recommendation for
<http://www.memorymedia.com/cgi-bin/webcart/webcart.cgi?CONFIG=mountain&RET=50&RCATS=CDR+Media+Spindled&FIRST_TIME=Yes&START=1&DOSEARCH=YES&CODE=484
Memory Media>, but have not tried their products.

== Cutting vs. Pressing ==

These days, the molded variety of business card-shaped CD-R are easy
to come by, and the cut variety should be spurned -- they are prone to
the same problems as early CD's were: the aluminum coating layer tends
to degrade since it's exposed at the ends.

Early BBCs (1.0 etc) used the cut variety at first, and they didn't
last long at all inside a wallet or pocket.  The first few runs of the
original Linuxcare BBC were fragile, and we got many complaints.  Be
sure to check that your blanks aren't cut!

